Kinematic Analysis - strain recorded in the rocks
The dominant structure in our area was an asymmetric northwest-plunging
syncline with an axial plane trace striking approximately NW/SE. 
We also found a monocline striking approximately 202° and dipping 
approximately 24. A low-angle detachment fault with scissoring has 
displaced the monocline, which contains one right lateral fault. 
Smaller scale folding occurs in the many layers of dolomitic sandstone 
and evaporite. We found left-lateral faults in the southern limb of the 
syncline as well as one large left lateral fault in the northern limb. 
Dynamic Analysis - strain within context of local and regional stress
To get the large-scale syncline, with axial plane trace NW/SE, σ1 needed 
to have been NE/SW and σ3 needed to have been vertical. The small scale
folding within the finely bedded sandstone and evaporite layers results
from variations in internal competence and the ductile nature of the salts. 
A second stress regime is required to cause the plunge present in the syncline.
A σ1 oriented NW/SE is required. The scissoring, rotational motion visible in the 
faulted monocline must be driven by a less predictable stress field. 
Tectonic analysis 
The San Andreas Fault is, in general, a NW/SE trending, dextral strike-slip fault.
On a smaller scale, however, the SAF is made up of a network of smaller faults of differing type
and displacement.3
Our region is between the Helendale and Sheep Hole Faults that are part of the San Andreas system. 
The Helendale Fault trends 314°, and the Sheep Hole Fault is trending 330°.1 As the faults are 
subparallel, their motion drives compression in the south and extension in the north, providing
the stress field required for folding.
Substratum-driven rotation in the past 10Ma accounts for the discrepancy between calculated
offset and observed offset along the San Andreas Fault.1 In turn the rotation causes sinistral
strike-slip faults within the rotating block and transpressional stress in the NW and SE.1 
We attribute the NW plunge of the fold to this transpressional stress. The scissoring fault
running through the monocline is a direct result of the clockwise rotation through the neogene.2 
Mass faulting has damaged the continental crust. The widespread fractures become weaknesses
in the crust. Because some areas are more susceptible to deformation that others, the strain
distribution is not uniform. As noted by our area of study, areas that are more susceptible 
to deformation are at or near the plate boundary. The San Andreas Fault cuts across California 
causing the land to be moved north along the fault, however, the “San Andreas Fault” is not
one seam between the Pacific and North American plates, but rather a system of smaller faults 
forming a patchwork across California. These unique faults combine to create mesoscale stress 
and strain systems, such as the one represented by our mapping area.
Overall regional strain shows the plate movement is northwest, yet the local strain differs
due to the extensional faults that occur. Because the strain is not homogeneously distributed, 
but rather focused at the tips of the transpressional system, it manifests differently across geographic 
space. This creates faults of different displacement and class due to both compressional and extensional forces, 
but ultimately in net accordance with the large-scale systems.
